What are deep ConvNets really learning?
In this video, I want to share with you
some visualizations that will help you
hone your intuition about what the deeper
layers of a ConvNet really are doing.
And this will help us think
through how you can implement
neural style transfer as well.
Let's start with an example.
Lets say you've trained a ConvNet,
this is an alex net like network,
and you want to visualize what the hidden
units in different layers are computing.
Here's what you can do.
Let's start with a hidden unit in layer 1.
And suppose you scan through your training
sets and find out what are the images or
what are the image patches that
maximize that unit's activation.
So in other words pause your training set
through your neural network, and figure
out what is the image that maximizes
that particular unit's activation.
Now, notice that a hidden unit in layer 1,
will see only a relatively small
portion of the neural network.
And so if you visualize, if you plot
what activated unit's activation,
it makes makes sense to plot
just a small image patches,
because all of the image that
that particular unit sees.
So if you pick one hidden unit and
find the nine input images that maximizes
that unit's activation, you might
find nine image patches like this.
So looks like that in the lower region
of an image that this particular hidden
unit sees, it's looking for an egde or
a line that looks like that.
So those are the nine image
patches that maximally activate
one hidden unit's activation.
Now, you can then pick a different hidden
unit in layer 1 and do the same thing.
So that's a different hidden unit,
and looks like this second one,
represented by these 9 image patches here.
Looks like this hidden unit is looking for
a line sort of in that portion of its
input region,
we'll also call this receptive field.
And if you do this for other hidden units,
you'll find other hidden units,
tend to activate in image
patches that look like that.
This one seems to have a preference for
a vertical light edge, but
with a preference that
the left side of it be green.
This one really prefers orange colors,
and this is an interesting image patch.
This red and green together will make
a brownish or a brownish-orangish color,
but the neuron is still happy to
activate with that, and so on.
So this is nine different
representative neurons and for
each of them the nine image patches
that they maximally activate on.
So this gives you a sense that,
units, train hidden units in layer 1,
they're often looking for
relatively simple features such as edge or
a particular shade of color.
And all of the examples I'm using in
this video come from this
paper by Mathew Zeiler and
Rob Fergus, titled visualizing and
understanding convolutional networks.
And I'm just going to use one
of the simpler ways to visualize
what a hidden unit in a neural
network is computing.
If you read their paper, they have
some other more sophisticated ways of
visualizing when the ConvNet
is running as well.
But now you have repeated this
procedure several times for
nine hidden units in layer 1.
What if you do this for
some of the hidden units in the deeper
layers of the neuron network.
And what does the neural network
then learning at a deeper layers.
So in the deeper layers, a hidden unit
will see a larger region of the image.
Where at the extreme end each pixel
could hypothetically affect the output of
these later layers of the neural network.
So later units are actually
seen larger image patches,
I'm still going to plot the image patches
as the same size on these slides.
But if we repeat this procedure, this
is what you had previously for layer 1,
and this is a visualization of what
maximally activates nine different
hidden units in layer 2.
So I want to be clear about
what this visualization is.
These are the nine patches that cause
one hidden unit to be highly activated.
And then each grouping, this is
a different set of nine image patches that
cause one hidden unit to be activated.
So this visualization shows nine
hidden units in layer 2, and
for each of them shows nine image
patches that causes that hidden unit
to have a very large output,
a very large activation.
And you can repeat these for
deeper layers as well.
Now, on this slide, I know it's
kind of hard to see these tiny little
image patches, so
let me zoom in for some of them.
For layer 1, this is what you saw.
So for example, this is that first unit
we saw which was highly activated, if
in the region of the input image, you can
see there's an edge maybe at that angle.
Now let's zoom in for layer 2 as well,
to that visualization.
So this is interesting,
layer 2 looks it's detecting more
complex shapes and patterns.
So for example, this hidden unit
looks like it's looking for
a vertical texture with
lots of vertical lines.
This hidden unit looks like
its highly activated when
there's a rounder shape to
the left part of the image.
Here's one that is looking for
very thin vertical lines and so on.
And so the features the second layer is
detecting are getting more complicated.
How about layer 3?
Let's zoom into that,
in fact let me zoom in even bigger, so
you can see this better, these are the
things that maximally activate layer 3.
But let's zoom in even bigger, and
so this is pretty interesting again.
It looks like there is a hidden
unit that seems to respond highly
to a rounder shape in the lower left
hand portion of the image, maybe.
So that ends up detecting a lot of cars,
dogs and
wonders is even starting to detect people.
And this one look like it is detecting
certain textures like honeycomb shapes,
or square shapes, this irregular texture.
And some of these it's difficult to look
at and manually figure out what is it
detecting, but it is clearly starting
to detect more complex patterns.
How about the next layer?
Well, here is layer 4, and
you'll see that the features or
the patterns is detecting or
even more complex.
It looks like this has learned
almost a dog detector, but
all these dogs likewise similar, right?
Is this, I don't know what dog species or
dog breed this is.
But now all those are dogs, but
they look relatively similar as dogs go.
Looks like this hidden unit and
therefore it is detecting water.
This looks like it is actually
detecting the legs of a bird and so on.
And then layer 5 is detecting
even more sophisticated things.
So you'll notice there's also a neuron
that seems to be a dog detector,
but set of dogs detecting
here seems to be more varied.
And then this seems to be detecting
keyboards and things with a keyboard
like texture, although maybe
lots of dots against background.
I think this neuron here may be detecting
text, it's always hard to be sure.
And then this one here
is detecting flowers.
So we've gone a long way from
detecting relatively simple things
such as edges in layer 1
to textures in layer 2,
up to detecting very complex
objects in the deeper layers.
So I hope this gives you some better
intuition about what the shallow and
deeper layers of a neural
network are computing.
Next, let's use this intuition to
start building a neural-style transfer
algorithm.